I was beginning to wonder for a moment there while we were singing, if something happened and I missed it, and we had already slipped into glory because there were a few moments where it certainly began to seem that way.
Well, we'll continue our exposition through 2 Corinthians 11 this morning, coming to verses 12 through 15.
C.S.
Lewis famously wrote a book entitled, The Screwtape Letters.
He poses in that book as a senior ranking demon named Screwtape, and he writes a series of 31 letters instructing this novice demon, Wormwood, and how to secure the condemnation of a young man.
Lewis would later say that that was one of the darker periods of his life, as he put himself in such literally hellish shoes.
One scheme after another is put forward.
And in the preface to this book, Louis famously writes, there are two equal and opposite errors into which our race can fall about the devils.
One is to disbelieve in their existence.
The other is to believe and to feel an excessive and unhealthy interest in them.
Them themselves are equally pleased by both errors and hail a materialist
or a magician with the same delight.
Whether we obsess over the things of darkness and Satan or whether we deny them all together, Satan is just as pleased to openly pull us into his charades as he is to work covertly without even our awareness of what he is doing.
The title of today's sermon is servants of Satan, the person employs of the devil.
What does it mean to be a servant of Satan?
Does it mean that you wear black, that you drink blood, that you hide in graveyards, that you cast magic spells?
Certainly those things can pertain to Satan, but this is not the primary modus operandi of Satan.
particularly as we see in the passage before us this morning.
We've seen how in the church in core rent, there is perversion all throughout this church.
They have been infiltrated and there are tensions, there are problems, there are divisions, there is idolatry, there is immorality, there is one problem after the other.
And even the Apostle Paul is having a hard time straightening them out.
Now we begin to peel back the curtain and we begin to see why this church has been having so many problems.
There's more than meets the eye because we wrestle ultimately not against flesh and blood, but against the principalities of this dark age.
However, sometimes we forget that that war in the heavenly places takes place on the contours of this earth
And it is a war with flesh and blood.
In the ultimate sense, it goes beyond that.
In the media sense, we really are dealing with satanic influence in many places.
Look with me in 2 Corinthians chapter 11.
We saw over the last couple of weeks, four truths that deeply concern the apostle Paul's heart and the life of this local church.
In verses one through two, we saw
the promise of Paul to the church, you have been committed to Christ.
We saw in verse three, you are being deceived in your devotion.
We saw that serpent who first rose his head and Genesis three now continues to try to seduce the church and allure her even in the most pious of ways back into the sin from which she came.
In verses four, five and six, we saw the
charge, you need discernment in your judgment.
In verses 7 through 11, as Brian read earlier, I believe Paul's charge is you can trust a ministry of humble sacrificial service.
As they try to discern who to trust, who not to trust, and as they discern how to judge in this matter of the fine line between truth and error, the two which oftentimes look so much alike.
And Paul has exemplified humble sacrificial service faithfully serving this church under the calling of God.
You can trust this faithful ministry, receive it and open your hearts.
He pleads with the church, but he pleads with the church as he pleads with them to open their hearts to his faithful ministry to close their hearts to what's so appealing, but is in fact false.
false apostles.
Look with me as we come now to verses 12 through 15, just a few verses that will certainly fill our hands this morning.
Paul unmasked three frauds in the church.
Number one in verses 12 and 13, we see the disciples in apostolic deceit.
We see deceivers who are disguised as men of God.
Deceivers who are disguised as men of God.
Number two, in verse 14, we'll see the devil and angelic disguise, Satan disguised as an angel of light, a very famous verse.
And finally, verse 15, we see thirdly, the demons in pious dress, demons disguised as ministers of righteousness.
And the point of all of this in part is that things are not always what they appear to be on the surface.
You certainly can't always judge a book by its cover.
Look with me firstly at the disciples in apostolic to see.
The point is that we are seeing deceivers who are disguised as men of God.
Look with me in your Bibles at verse 12.
And what I am doing, Paul says, I will continue to do in order to undermine the claim of those who would like to claim
that in their boasted mission, they were key words on the same terms as we do.
What is Paul doing here?
What is he responding to?
In the immediate context, he is refusing to receive financial support from this church and instead other churches are giving to Paul to support him so that he can minister in the church at Corinth.
He doesn't want any stigma
that could make people think that he's just in it for the money.
There's a specific situation going on here that he is trying to be very careful with so that he is not overly dependent upon the church and he doesn't give in to this smear campaign that's been cast against him.
He's refusing also to engage in this showy, eloquent, finely spun rhetoric, rhetoric that is very flashy and winsome and charismatic on the surface.
But it's devoid of the truth of God when you get down to the substance of it.
He's made that very clear.
And Paul is in this section, warning the church of false teachers, buddy, they're coming.
Not just from the outside, they will arise from the inside.
Paul has been telling the church since Acts 20, when he spoke to the elders in Ephesus, wolves will arise from your midst.
They're coming from among you, and by the time we get to 2 Corinthians 11, they are there in the most unsuspecting of ways.
So he's warning the church against them, defending his apostolic authority against the smear campaign launched against him, and he is sacrificially serving this church in tears and humility.
The things that Paul says are very unpopular.
They're calling even
the heart of his character in question.
And look with me in verse 12, Paul says, and what I am doing, I will continue to do.
In season and out of season, popular or unpopular, received or not received.
I am faithfully laying my life down and devoting it to the proclamation of the truth.
Look with me, he says in the ESV that he labors to undermine the claim of those who would like to claim.
The King James says, cut off the occasion from them which they desire occasion.
The new King James similarly puts it, cut off the opportunity from those who would desire an opportunity.
In other words, Paul is trying to cut their feet out from under them so that they don't have a single leg to stand on.
The word is used of eliminating, of doing away with something, of cutting it off altogether.
So Paul refuses to just go along to get along.
He refuses to give into these hucksters because they are propagating deceptive claims and Paul wants to shut off every opportunity.
He refuses to allow even a crack in the door because he knows as soon as he does, they'll put their foot in it
and then they'll capitalize on that crack and only begin to open it farther and farther until as the old parable goes before you know it, the entire camel is in the tent.
And Paul cuts their feet out from under them, refusing to identify with them in any way.
Look with me in verse 12, he goes on, he asserts that these false teachers are wanting to work, asserting that they work on the same terms,
And you could add same team as Paul and his co-laborers.
It could read, they work on the same terms as or they work on the same, and the same glory or they work to be found as we are, wanting to be regarded just as we are in these matters.
As if they had the same calling, the same credibility, the same motivation, propagating the same truth,
under the same calling of God.
So on one hand, they're undermining Paul's ministry in every way.
And if you'll stay tuned, Lord willing, next Sunday, it almost appears as if a fist fight has broken out in this church and there attempts to undermine Paul's ministry.
And Paul says, we'll have nothing to do with it, to legitimize themselves
as teachers and preachers in any way, we are not on the same team.
Did he not already make this clear in 2 Corinthians 6?
When he said, what partnership does God and Satan have?
What in common does darkness and righteousness share?
And the obvious answer, ladies and gentlemen, is absolutely nothing.
I think one of the greatest illustrations of this
comes from Ezra chapter four.
Do you remember when we were in the book of Ezra?
And God's people have been sent back to their home to rebuild the temple of God after 70 years of exile.
They're understaffed.
They're underfunded.
The work is long and tedious.
And all of a sudden, some other guys show up claiming to serve the same God that they serve, working on the same terms
in which they were.
And they said, hey, let us join together in the building with you.
You can hear many modern leaders immediately after the mouths of many would come, well, certainly because many hands make work like the more the merrier.
And those leaders in Ezra chapter four said,
We don't worship the same God and you will have nothing to do with building his house with us.
We will build alone if that's what it takes.
And they paid a very, very heavy price of about a hundred years of persecution because of that stand that they were willing to make.
Paul says in 1 Corinthians 9, 12, if others have a claim on you saying similar word use, don't we all the more?
But we're sacrificing the rights that we have in order to serve you so that there's no obstacles between you and the gospel.
And now Paul uses very strong language, putting such significant distance between him and them
And if you look with me in verse 13, this is where Paul begins to rip the mask right off their face and boldly confronts exactly who they are.
The language signifies that we're not just having a minor theological debate.
This is not just some differences of which are found among all Christians in some way or another.
This is a heel that Paul is willing
to die on.
Look with men, verse 13, as he unmasked who they are before a congregation, many of which would have loved these men, respected their ministry.
So this would be very, very personal.
When he said, for such men are false apostles, deceitful workmen, disguising themselves as
ending where he started in verse 13, Apostles of Christ.
In 2 Corinthians chapter 4, we saw the light of the gospel and the knowledge of Jesus Christ.
We saw the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ.
And we begin to move now to look darkness and all of the powers of darkness square in the face.
and see exactly the opposite.
From light and righteousness to night and to gravity, and Paul is so clear, this whole operation is a grand masquerade.
Posing is if they were one thing when in reality, they are completely the opposite.
This word for apostles could be used in the broad sense of
anyone who has sent a sent one of God.
But used in this context, it seems that they are claiming as if they are in the same standing as the original 12.
Not just an apostle, but one of the apostles.
What a strong claim.
And Paul unmasked them that though they may be claiming to be apostles, they are false and they are frauds in every sense of the word.
They are not of Christ.
They are deceitful workmen.
They are deceiving the people of God.
This will continue into Revelation chapter 13 verses 11 through 14 that speaks of a lamb-like dragon, a dragon with lamb-like characteristics.
How deceitful is that in itself.
And this dragon will have great authority and perform miracles.
And the Bible says he will deceive many.
even the elect if that were possible.
So they are disguising themselves.
Listen to 2 Timothy chapter 3, Paul writes Timothy and he says, listen, imposters will go on from bad to worse.
They will deceive and they are being deceived.
They will sell to others the same false bill of goods that they are buying straight from hell.
And Paul tells Timothy, but as for you, young man, you be faithful.
You don't buy a lick of it, and you devote yourself to the words of Holy Scripture, and you keep on the narrow way.
Look with me in verse 13, what else he says, the most alarming of all of the language.
He'll repeat this.
He says, in some translations, they are disguising themselves.
In the King James it translates, they are transforming themselves into apostles of Christ.
It's simply the word refers to presenting yourself as that which you are truly not.
Listen to Proverbs chapter 26 verse 24.
Whoever hates disguises himself with lips and harbors deceit in his heart.
When he speaks graciously, believe him not, for there are seven abominations in his heart.
Though his hatred be covered with deception, his wickedness will be exposed in the assembly.
And I tend to believe that Paul was reading Proverbs 26 because that headline was unfolding right before his very eyes.
Beware of false prophets.
They will come to you in sheep's clothing.
But inwardly, Jesus said they are ravenous wolves seeking to tear you and your family and your soul and your sanctification and all that is good and true and beautiful to shreds.
This is what Jesus said.
Listen to the imagery that he used of the Pharisees boldly confronting their hypocrisy.
He said outwardly,
They're clean and they're righteous and they're beautiful.
Outwardly they are pious, but inwardly they are unclean, dead and full of hypocrisy and lawlessness.
In summary, Jesus said, they are white washed tombs, full of life and beauty on the outside and filled with death and destruction, harboring violence.
in their hearts on the inside.
Ladies and gentlemen, is it not so easy for us to be tempted to clean ourselves up on the outside so that we appear piously as those who love God religiously with all of the right externals on the outside?
Even if we're not ravenous wolves on the inside,
We are not what we portray ourselves to be in any sense of the word, and we love to clean the outside of the pot.
And on the inside of it is death, that if it's not dealt with, it will kill you and all that come in contact with it.
And let me tell you something about this one.
It's kind of like this stomach bug that's going around.
Man, if you get within 10 miles of this stomach bug, I'm telling you, you're getting it, buddy.
And you are going down.
There is a virus infinitely worse than anything that we can catch in this natural realm of physical illness.
And it destroys everything it touches.
Friends, is it not so easy for us to clean ourselves on the outside and inside?
We're dead men's bones.
Repent.
Believe the gospel.
as Christ to make you new from the inside out.
1 Timothy chapter 5 gave some very clear instructions to the church.
Look with me in your Bible at 1 Timothy chapter 5.
Paul has given qualifications for elders and pastors.
Paul, the more for apostles are those who would present themselves as such.
And in 1 Timothy 524, he does something that maybe the church in Corinth failed to do.
We don't know for sure.
He says in verse 24, don't be hasty in the laying on of hands to ordain and acknowledge people as elders and pastors in the church.
And then he gives reasoning for why.
He says, the sins of some people will come later
behind them and they will take a little bit longer to see.
There's a facade or there's character issues and it takes a little longer for it to come out and be exposed when tested.
But in verse 25 he says, so also good works are conspicuous and even those that are not cannot remain hidden.
So Jesus says we need to exercise discernment.
It's all going to be exposed in the end anyway.
But it can lead many astray in the meantime.
I love how Jesus put this in the gospel.
He said, you're trying to sort out the good from the righteous.
Understand this, wisdom is proved right by all of her children.
You want to see if it's true and godly wisdom?
You want to know if the spirit of God is involved in this?
Then understand this, time and truth go hand in hand.
Time and faithfulness in what's worked out over an extended period of time tends to reveal the truth of what's in the heart.
Children is just like this.
It's just like this.
You squeeze a lemon and you're gonna get lemon juice coming out of it every time.
And when you squeeze, you see what's on the inside.
It seems in reality that what's on the inside is what Paul said already in 2 Corinthians 2 17, they're peddling the gospel.
Chapter 10 verse two, they're accusing him of walking in the flesh.
Chapter 10 verse 12, they're commending themselves, putting themselves forward.
Chapter 11 verse four, they're preaching another gospel.
Chapter 11 verse five, they're elevating themselves as super apostles.
Jesus would tell
The Ephesian Church in Revelation chapter 2, I commend you because you have tested those who claim to be apostles and they are not and you have found them to be false.
What a condemnation.
He says in the book of Galatians that these men, these people, they trouble you, they distort the gospel and he used
It uses military type language when he says false brothers have been secretly brought in to spy out the freedom we have in Christ so that they could enslave us right back into what we came from.
Philippians says they preach Christ from envy and rivalry, but
They are enemies of the cross.
Titus 1 says they are empty talkers, deceivers in subordinate.
They are upsetting entire families for their own personal gain.
2 Peter 2 says false teachers arose secretly bringing in destructive heresies, even denying the master who made them.
1 John says, test the spirits.
Philippians says, look out for evil doers that exalt their own
spirituality to destroy yours.
And what sobering is that the disciples wrestled with what to do with this.
This is only a sampling of all of the passages from Genesis to Revelation that deal with this matter of false teachers.
And we are to exercise discernment, even church discipline in this earthly life.
But in the end, God says in Matthew 13, 48, or 49, He's gonna have the angels to sort all of this out.
And He's gonna sort out the righteous from the unrighteous and His judgment will be just.
It is no wonder that we are reading what we are about this disguise, this transformation in verse 13.
Because the one thing Satan loves to do is counterfeit.
Counterfeit.
We saw in 2 Corinthians chapter 3 that the new covenant is from the Spirit.
It gives freedom and it transforms those under it from one degree of glory to another.
It transforms us into his image.
But now we're seeing those who transform themselves
into what they are actually not as apostles of Christ.
And so be transformed in the renewing of your mind by the truth.
Paul says, don't be conformed to the image of the world.
Let love be genuine, abhor what is evil, hold fast to what is good, Romans 12, 9.
Brothers and sisters, this is what we do.
And I want you to see wine.
Number two, the devil and angelic disguise.
Satan disguised as an angel of light.
The only place in the Bible where we see this, this explicitly, but yet the rest of the Bible gives us examples of how this is true.
One of the darkest, most dangerous verses in the entire canon of Scripture.
men and women, boys and girls, please listen, verse 14.
And no wonder, it's no surprise it could read and don't marvel.
This should not be a surprise to you that these men are doing this for even Satan disguises himself how?
As an angel,
of light.
This is a terrifying passage because many will only understand its implications when they wake up and it's too late.
Disguises himself.
It's an argument from the greater to the lesser.
Certainly, if Satan does this as the greater, his servants would do this as the lesser.
Jesus himself said that a servant is not above his master.
But when fully trained becomes just like him, I love how the Geneva Bible explains in a footnote, by light is meant to heavenly glory, where if the angels are partakers.
So what does Satan look like?
We have a culture that is increasingly fascinated with matters of darkness.
portray him in so many different ways.
What does Satan actually look like?
Is he a figment in a Hollywood horror movie, black mask hooded with a pitchfork?
Is he creeping around in the shadows with a sharp sickle in his hand?
Does he come with red horns and a cape?
Does he look like some mythical fire breathing dragon?
Certainly he is portrayed that way in some places.
Does Satan look like dark, popular rock music stars who claim to represent him and darkness?
Is he found in dark magic, Ouija boards, wicking cults, hard drugs, alcohol?
Does Satan like to just come out in costumes on Halloween?
Is that where he is?
Does Satan show himself in movies and books like Harry Potter?
Is that where Satan is?
Does he have some deep guttural voice?
What does he look like?
How does he show himself?
In the Pilgrim's Progress, he's pictured as a polyon, battling against Christian in the Valley of Humiliation.
And John Milton's Paradise Lost, and in Dante's Inferno, we see these very imaginative descriptions of Satan and hell and what he's like.
In the Chronicles of Narnia, the wicked witch personifies all that is wicked and evil against the kingdom of Aslan.
In the Lord of the Rings, we see Sauron, who's satanically
rules the hell of Mordor seeking to overcome his borders throughout the entire world.
I believe there is an increasing fascination with the occult, with death and with darkness in our day.
I believe that oftentimes, but not always, you find these sorts of experiences
in a life of very hard drugs, very hard alcohol, where people are having very well, maybe demonic experiences in some very explicit ways.
But ladies and gentlemen, this is not the primary way.
I believe that we see Satan revealing himself in the New Testament churches.
When Satan can't overcome the church with sheer external force, with fear and with raw power, I believe what Satan does is he begins to attend church.
And then I believe he begins to sign up for the new members class and he ends up joining the church and before long he's ordained as a pastor to lead it.
I think that's the precedent that we see.
in the New Testament.
Satan's mantra is personified by John Milton as this, better to reign in hell than to serve in heaven, which is the exact opposite of what the Psalmist said when he said, I would be content as a doorkeeper in the house of my God.
And yet he upends everything that is true and good and beautiful, saying just the opposite.
He is just as fine with a dark, unhealthy preoccupation with the things of darkness as he is with a complete disbelief in him and a materialistic society.
And just a subtle forgetfulness about him and his ways is just as content to fly under the radar undercover.
Look with me in your Bibles, an angel of light.
He's the great counterfeiter.
What do we see about the portrayal of God throughout Scripture?
How does God reveal Himself in light?
In a burning bush, in blazing glory, over and over and over through Jesus Christ, on Mount Transfiguration,
with beauty and glory and with light.
What is light in the Bible through out Scripture lie represents all that is holy and true, all that is pure and trustworthy.
And this is exactly the garments that Satan closed himself in.
Many extra biblical Jewish works
portray Satan through stories of literally appearing in the form of an actual angel.
Or it may be the idea here that Satan appears not so much in a literal fashion as presenting himself as he is in Corinth, innocently and purely.
And he comes just as he did in the garden to bring enlightenment.
of that which we did not already know, or that which God has twisted.
It's as old as Genesis 3.
I want you to turn with me in your Bible to Isaiah chapter 14.
Isaiah chapter 14.
Whether coming as a literal angel or coming metaphorically through servants, presenting himself as holy,
Many scholars throughout history have believed that there are two prophecies in the Old Testament that go beyond their immediate fulfillment.
The purpose of Isaiah 14 is to describe the king of Babylon and the fall that God is bringing in his life.
But many have believed this to be something that could only be fulfilled in one greater and one
underneath the king of Babylon.
Isaiah 14 12 says, how you are fallen from heaven, O day star, referring to the light, son of dawn, how you are cut down to the ground, you who laid the nations low, you said in your heart, here they are, I will ascend to heaven above the stars,
of God, I will set my throne on high.
I will sit on the mound of assembly and the far reaches of the north.
I will ascend above the height of the clouds.
And fifthly, I will make myself like who the most high.
But you are brought down to shield to the far reaches of the pit.
This is the demonic heart and mindsets of the children of wrath, which is all of us in our natural state apart from Christ.
And it's this, I will make myself known and extend my glory and put my throne above every other throne.
You watch me, I will.
Exert my will above your will, even God's will, because I know best.
All the way back to Genesis chapter three, and it continues to be a temptation to us today.
Please be honest in your heart.
Have any of you walk through a season in your life where you are absolutely convinced that you knew better than God.
All of us.
Children.
Children, you are absolutely convinced at some places in your life that you know way more than your parents do.
Turn with me to one other passage, Ezekiel 28.
Ezekiel 28 is prophecy about the king of Tyre.
Jesus said in Luke 10, 18, I saw Satan fall like lightning from heaven.
And because of that, many commentators conclude and believe that Ezekiel 28 verses 11 through 19 may be a reflection far beyond the king of Tyre with a double fulfillment and Satan himself.
Look with me in verse 12.
He was the signant of perfection full of wisdom and perfect in beauty.
He was in the garden of Eden, verse 13, with every precious jewel when he was created.
Verse 14, an anointed guardian cherub, an angel on God's holy mountain, placed there by God.
Verse 15, he was blameless.
And then we see in verse 16, one whom God cast down
who became profane filled with violence.
Verse 17, pride was in his heart because of his beauty.
He was exposed.
Verse 18, he profaned sanctuaries.
He multiplied sin.
He openly appalled the people because of his dread.
Maybe this is a reflection of Satan.
It is certainly a reflection of all of his ways to corrupt and taint what God created.
is good.
And I am here to tell you for a solid hour, the same thing I've been preaching to myself all week long, don't buy it because it does not produce what it promises.
Satan will buy you a ticket to any pleasurable place you want to go and he will spare no expense and take care of every cost and then he will kill you on the way.
He is deceitful, he is deceptive, and he is not what he appears to be.
He shows himself in Corinth.
In 1 Corinthians 5, a scandalous, unrepentant sinner is turned literally over to Satan, just as we read in 1 Timothy 1, 20.
In 1 Corinthians 7, 5,
Paul says, married couples should regularly give themselves to one another to undercut the temptations of Satan.
In 1 Corinthians 10, we see that sacrifices are being offered to demons.
Listen to this, in 2 Corinthians 2, 11, unforgiveness is taking place in the church.
And sin has been dealt with, but forgiveness has not been rightly
extended, even though repentance is in order.
And it seems like the church may be tempted to hold onto a grudge, to nurture bitterness.
And Paul says this, you need to forgive because we are not outwitted by Satan's devices.
What if Satan was more concerned with promoting bitterness among friends in the family and the church and nurturing that unforgiveness than he is?
with horns and pitchforks, because it could be way more effective to do what he came to do, which is to kill, steal, and destroy.
2 Corinthians 4, the God of this age, 2 Corinthians 6, Belial.
Second Corinthians 11-3, the serpent in the garden, the grave seducer.
Now second Corinthians 11-14, masquerading.
Second Corinthians 12-7, a very servant of Satan himself, harasses the Apostle Paul with a form.
Now I want you to turn to the end of the story.
Turn with me in your Bible to Revelation chapter 12.
Revelation chapter 12.
is beginning to near the end of this showdown.
It's not that God and Satan are dueling it out is equals.
God is completely sovereign and will put his foot on the throat of Satan and cut his head off.
But in the meantime, Jesus was promised through the woman and God said in the curse, there will be a war between the offspring of the woman from whom would come Jesus and his people.
and the offspring of Satan and children of wrath.
And we see that played out throughout Scripture until we get to Revelation 12, seven, which says, now, war arose in heaven.
Michael and his angels fighting against the dragon.
We've already seen this in the book of Daniel.
You see the Prince of Persia, this war that erupts in the heavens, which many believe to be a reference to demons.
Verse 7, and the dragon and his angels fought back, but he was defeated, and there was no longer any place for them in heaven.
And the great dragon was thrown down that ancient serpent who was called the devil and Satan.
Here it is, the deceiver of the whole world.
He was thrown down to the earth, and his angels were thrown down with him.
And I heard a loud voice in heaven saying,
Now the salvation and the power and the kingdom of our God and the authority of his Christ have come.
For the accuser of our brothers has been thrown down.
He accuses them day and night before our God, just as the high priest was accused in Zechariah 3, rightly so.
But God clothed that priest in the righteous garments of Jesus Christ
with forgiveness and assurance.
But ladies and gentlemen, that does not stop our enemy from accusing us.
Honest before God, you ever come in here on a Sunday morning and we're singing and we are lifting up the name of Jesus Christ and you almost feel yourself, you good badness, tempted to become Pentecostal and put your hand up until you realize like, what's wrong with me?
And your hands are up, lifting holy hands to give praise to God.
And all of a sudden there it is, get that hand down.
Who do you think you are?
They may not know who you are, but I know who you are, the accuser.
And they have conquered him by the blood of the lamb and by the word of their testimony, for they love not their lives even unto death.
Therefore rejoice, O heavens, and you who dwell in them, but woe to you, O earth and sea.
But the devil has come down to you in great wrath because he knows what, that his time is short.
And so the fury enrages.
How is he termed?
How is he named in Scripture?
His names tell us everything we need to know about his schemes and his character.
He's the devil.
He's Satan.
He's Lucifer, which is a reference to his existence as the Morning Star.
He's the father of lies.
He's the murderer.
He's the accuser.
He's the adversary and the roaring lion seeking to destroy your family.
He is the wicked one.
He is the tempter.
He is a polyon.
He is the prince, a ruler of the power of the air.
He is the spirit at work in the sons of disobedience.
He is the God, lowercase G, of this world.
He's the ruler of this world.
He's Beelzebub.
He's the evil one.
He's the enemy who sows tears in every good field.
Ladies and gentlemen, you plant a good field and I guarantee you the enemy will sow it with tears every time.
He's the great dragon.
He's the romer of the earth seeking to destroy Job.
He's the divider of the church.
He's belial, meaning the worthless one.
He's the tainer of all that is good for Timothy four.
He is a theologian.
James chapter two, but he hates God.
He's a seducer.
He's the hinderer.
1 Thessalonians 2, 18, he's the sifter wanting to sift Peter as we.
And he is the counterfeiter.
Satan has his own gospel.
Satan has his own ordinances to baptize us into.
He has his own covenant promises, none of which he's ever kept.
He has his own children.
He has his own signs and wonders.
He has his own mission.
He has his own weapons.
He has his own discipline.
Satan is very powerful, not even Holy Angels bear to rebuke Satan, but leave that to the Lord Jesus himself to rebuke him.
But his power is limited severely under the sovereignty of God.
Satan is very knowledgeable.
He has intel.
He has intelligence.
And it's not because he can know everything
It's not because he can know our thoughts, but because he has had time through his demons to study the nature of man from the beginning of creation.
He has had time through his demons to study your life.
Satan is very much present through his demons.
And the reason why Satan is so active in a losing game, I believe is this, quite simply, misery loves company.
You ever know people who are miserable and can't be happy?
And the only thing that will be make them happy is to make you as miserable as they are?
First and foremost, Satan is a glory stealer.
This really has nothing to do with you.
You have no value before him.
But what you have is the image of God within you.
And if you're a Christian, you are a temple of the Holy Spirit of God.
And what God really hates, what rather Satan really hates is God.
And if he can't come after God whom we can't see, and he has no power to contend with, how would Satan get after the very image and glory of God, but to go after those who are made in his own image?
And especially children.
And as we look at his schemes and tactics in an extremely limited way today, I would say that there are very many areas to which he has been quite successful.
The question is always asked, why did God create a being that would be Satan?
And the only answer that we know so far as the scripture teaches is for his glory.
to show his redemption and his grace and his power and his goodness over all things.
But friends, rest assured that Satan and evil and hell and demons in the hands of God, in the end, will be nothing more than an instrument through which to show his glory.
Brothers and sisters in Christ, listen to Romans 1620, the fulfillment of this entire war that's taken place
The God of peace will soon crush Satan under your feet.
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you.
I want you to look with me finally.
Turn back to 2 Corinthians chapter 11.
Because until that battle is decisively ended and the victory is manifested in every possible way.
We have thirdly demons in pious dress, demons disguised as ministers of righteousness.
Now it could be that these are actual demons, but more likely I believe that it's a demonic influence, if not a demonic possession of human peoples who are doing their will.
He comes back in verse 15 and finally, and he says, so it is no surprise, no great thing, no marvel.
If his Satan servants or his ministers also disguise, transform themselves as servants or ministers of righteousness.
So it's no surprise that these false teachers would do this and Paul reiterates it again.
This is a demonic enterprise.
Look at this.
Look with me in verse 15.
Ministers are servants of what church?
Righteousness.
Isn't that interesting?
Because the one thing that Paul said about the new covenant that Christians now have the glory of serving under is that it is a ministry of righteousness.
And of all of the words in the human vocabulary that could have been chosen to describe the ministry or the deceptive word of demons through human servants, the word used is righteousness, which is everything they are not.
You see, this seems kind of interesting.
This almost seems a little bit cute.
This seems like a fun fairy tale to enter.
This seems like something intriguing when we talk about Satan and the powers of hell and darkness until you see a family destroyed.
Do you see a church divided?
Do you see someone who is actually murdered in the streets?
Do you see an entire culture given over to depravity and all of a sudden it's not very funny anymore, is it?
Because then you see the schemes of Satan, which Paul said in 2 Corinthians 2, we should not be fearful of.
Can I say that again?
We should not be fearful of, but we should be aware of.
You have an enemy.
And I don't know how to counterfeit a $100 meal.
But I'll tell you what I wouldn't do.
I wouldn't start with a pink highlighter and a picture of Bugs Bunny right in the center.
I would take something that looks just like the real thing, which is while Paul said in Galatians 1 and in 2 Corinthians 7, even if an angel from heaven comes and proclaims to you a different gospel, let him be a cursed.
We seek throughout the New Testament where Satan and his demons actually inhabit possess unbelievers.
And I don't believe it's possible at all for them to possess true Christians.
But you know what they can do?
They can oppress.
They can come after.
And Paul will share about how that happened in his life in the next chapter.
Listen to how Paul confronts it.
In Acts 13 9, Phil with the Holy Spirit looked intently at him, this magician seeking to deceive others.
And he said, you are son, a you son of the devil, you enemy of all righteousness, full of deceit and villainy.
Will you not stop making crooked the straight pass of the Lord?
Boldness right out of the front.
Look with me finally in verse 15, one of the most promising verses.
Are you in the midst of spiritual warfare?
The answer is yes.
It's just that some of you realize that and some of you don't.
But is it coming against you?
One of the most surprising verses in the Bible, look with me in verse 15.
Speaking of these deceivers of darkness, rest assured brothers and sisters in Christ,
their end will correspond to their deeds.
Like if you can do 500 fist pumps when you read that verse, the Holy Spirit clearly is not in you.
It could reach whose end shall be according to their works.
In time, they will be exposed possibly even in an earthly sense, certainly eternally, and their punishment will match their crown.
And everything they're doing will be exposed, and they will get the condemnation that they rightly deserve.
Jesus Christ will return and write every wrong, and He will enact perfect justice.
And we need to ensure that through the blood of Christ, we are covered in the mercies of God in all of our sins.
1 Corinthians 3 says, God will destroy the one who seeks to destroy the church.
2 Timothy 4 says, God repays those who seek to harm his servant.
Philippians 3 says, their end is destruction.
Their God is their belly and their glory is their shame.
2 Peter lot tormented his righteous soul over their lawless deeds.
But God, who knows how to spare his people from evil, even as he keeps the unrighteous under punishment until the final judgment
Second Peter says that he will destroy wickedness.
Listen, in Jude 14, behold, the Lord comes with 10,000 of His holy ones to execute judgment on all and to convict all the ungodly of their deeds.
And here's what they look like.
Rumblers, malcontents, following their own sinful desire, they are loudmouth boasters.
They are showing favoritism to gain advantage.
Lord, Lord, that's a confession of orthodoxy.
That's what we're supposed to believe.
Lord, Lord, did we not prophesy, preach?
Did we not perform many mighty wonders in your name externally?
Did we not not only have it all together, but display everything that you would think would be inherent within righteousness?
And Jesus will tell them, depart from me.
You may have thought you knew me, but I never knew you.
Brothers and sisters in Christ, if Christ is in you, this is not you.
This is not you.
But it is a sobering consideration for us to consider the people around us and for people in this room.
It could be some of you.
But here's the end, Revelation 2010, and the devil who had deceived them was thrown into the lake of fire and sulfur, where the beast and the false prophet were, and they will be tormented day and night forever and ever.
This is not annihilationism, where false teachers and Satan and unbelievers undergo a limited form of punishment, and then they just cease to exist.
Friends, throughout scripture, this is an eternal, conscious punishment in a literal hell where people have memory.
where people continue to reject Christ where there is weeping and gnashing of teeth with anguish in this flame, Luke 1624, these high crimes against an infinitely holy God require such condemnation because what you have is unbelievers seeking to pay off a debt that can't be paid even through eternity in their own efforts.
And it's not as if they're in hell just wishing they could get out, but this mean monster God locked the door and threw away the key.
It's that their hearts continue to breathe out murderous threats against everything that is good.
Revelation 1611 says this on their tombstone, cursed the God of heaven for their pain and sores, they did not repent of their deeds.
And that's the end to which the way they live will correspond.
Their ends will correspond to their deeds.
But listen to what Martin Luther wrote in one of our favorite hymns.
And though this world with devils field should threaten to undo us,
We will not fear for God had wheeled his truth to triumph through us.
The prince of darkness grim.
We tremble not for him.
His rage we can endure for his, for low his doom is sure.
One little word shall fail him.
The word of Jesus in the wilderness shut him down, quoting the word of God.
And the word of God will secure his eternal destiny.
But only end by giving you a string of scriptures to conclude with.
Because Satan has an Achilles heel.
Satan has a kryptonite even in this life.
What does scripture tell us to do in response to these things?
Here they are.
Not points, just verses.
And I'll give them to your rapid fire.
Matthew chapter four.
What if your spiritual wellbeing was contingent upon how much of the book of Deuteronomy you had memorized?
Which is exactly the armory that Jesus pulls out every single time to combat the false promises of Satan.
He threw the word at him.
Acts 26, 18, turning them from the darkness of Satan to the light of God and receive forgiveness.
When people are forgiven, he is defanged all the more.
Jude 1, 9, the Archangel Michael, contending with the devil, called on God to rebuke him rather than doing it himself.
If he's in chapter 6, stand firm against the schemes of the devil and put on the full armor of God.
We see throughout Scripture where angels are guarding the people of God in some sense from evil.
James chapter 4 verse 7, submit yourself to God, resist the devil, repent from sin, pursue holiness and humble yourself before God.
This is your protection.
2 Timothy chapter 2, correct your opponents with gentleness so that they would escape the capture of Satan's snare.
Ephesians 4, 27, 2 Corinthians chapter 2 verse 11.
Don't simmer in your anger.
Don't harbor unforgiveness.
That is a scheme of hell.
1 John chapter 3 verses 8 through 10, refused to make a practice of sinning because when you do, you are just like the devil, but love your brother and submit to God.
1 John 2, 14, the Word of God is in you.
You have overcome the evil one.
And Hebrews two, 14, he himself likewise, partook of the same things that through death, he might destroy the one who has the power of death.
That is the devil and deliver all those who through fear of death were subject to lifelong slavery.
Their ends.
will correspond to their deeds.
And what is so powerful in scripture, using the same language is that in Hebrews chapter 10 verse 17, the Bible promises for every person who turns to Jesus Christ, the Bible says, I will remember their sins
and their lawless deeds.
No more.
Because the truth of the matter is that every single one of us deserve the fury and wrath of God.
But Jesus Christ closed us in His righteous garments as we turn to Him by faith, turning from our sins, embracing and trusting Him.
And He says,
that He takes all of our lawless deeds and He casts them into the sea of forgiveness and He forgives every single one of us.
Jesus Christ is our faithful, high priest.
Run to the help of His throne this morning.
This is why we pray.
Deliver us from the evil one.
And so He has.
And so we can and so he does.
And so we will.
Let's pray.
Lord, would you deliver us from the evil that lurks in our own hearts?
Would you deliver us from the evil one?
Would you change us and transform us into the likeness of Christ?
And would you equip our hands for battle?
Would you give your people rest today?
Would you bring delight those who are not in your saving grace so that they could turn to you?
And Father, would you give assurance of your power?
Would you give assurance of your promises and the hearts of your children and make a strong embrace this morning?
In Jesus' name we pray.
Amen.